Mcsvi (#93)
creatis-myriad/creatis-myriad.github.io: collections/_posts/2022-11-23-Multi_Channel_Stochastic_Variational_Inference.md

# Highlights

* The aim of this paper is to take into account several types of inputs (which are referred to as _channels_ in the paper) for a better joint analysis.
* They proposed a novel multi-channel stochastic generative model.
* Their proposed method can have applications for generic data fusion techniques.

# Introduction

When a patient suffers from Alzheimer’s disease, physicians use lots of sources of information. However, simple univariate correlation analysis are limited in modeling power. To overcome the limitations of mass-univariate analysis, methods such as PLS, RRR, CCA, and their variants (non-linearity, multi-channels) were used in biomedical research. The main issue is that those methods are not generative.
The authors proposed a novel multi-channel stochastic generative model for the joint analysis of multi-channel heterogeneous data.

# Methods

Let $$ \textbf{x}  = \{\textbf{x}_c\}_{c=1}^{C} $$ be a single observation of a set of C channels, where each $$ \textbf{x}_c \in \mathbb{R}^{d_c} $$ is a $$ d_c $$-dimensional vector.

* $$ p(\textbf{z}) $$ : prior

> * $$ p(\textbf{x}_c \vert \textbf{z}, \pmb{θ}_c) $$ : likelihood distribution

Reviewer: As much as possible, I would avoid using special unicode characters (the ŷ in this case) if a basic latex function can do the trick (\hat in thi case). It seems to work here, but I'm worried about edge-cases/updates that could possibly not support special characters.:
```suggestion
* $$ p(\textbf{x}_c \vert \textbf{z}, \pmb{\theta}_c) $$ : likelihood distribution
```

* $$ q(\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c, \pmb{\phi}_c) $$ : probability density function

> The aim is to minimize:
> 
> $$ \underset{q∈Q}{argmin} \: \mathbb{E}_c[D_{KL} (q (\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c, \pmb{\phi}_c) \parallel p (\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_1, \dots , \textbf{x}_C , \pmb{θ}_1, \dots , \pmb{θ}_C ) )] $$
> 
> **Hypothesis**: Every channel is conditionally independent from all the others given z (it will allow to factorize the data likelihood, see supplementary material in the paper for more details). 
> 
> After developping the equation from above they get:
> 
> $$ \mathscr{L}(\textbf{θ}, \pmb{\phi}, \textbf{x}) = \mathbb{E}_c \left[ \mathbb{E}_{q(\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c )} \left[  \sum_{i=1}^{C} ln \: p(\textbf{x}_i \vert \textbf{z}, \textbf{θ}_c) \right] − D_{KL} (q (\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c, \pmb{\phi}_c) \parallel p (\textbf{z}) ) \right] $$
> 
> 
> A figure used in the [Github repository](https://gitlab.inria.fr/epione_ML/mcvae) to understand the general idea:

Reviewer: Given the discussion and questions regarding the formulation of the objective during the presentation, and following a discussion with Olivier, I propose to provide:
1. An intermediate formulation of the objective
2. More textual interpretations of the equations
```suggestion
The objective can be formulated as:

$$ \underset{q∈Q}{argmin} \: \mathbb{E}_c[D_{KL} (q (\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c, \pmb{\phi}_c) \parallel p (\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_1, \dots , \textbf{x}_C , \pmb{θ}) )] $$

By rearranging the objective, the authors obtain a lower-bound:

$$
\mathbb{E}_c \left[ \mathbb{E}_{q(\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c )} \left[  ln \: p(\textbf{x} \vert \textbf{z}, \textbf{θ}_c) \right] − D_{KL} (q (\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c, \pmb{\phi}_c) \parallel p (\textbf{z}) ) \right]
$$

A few interesting points to note about this new formulation are:
- The **data matching term naturally emerges from reformulating the posterior constraint**, independently from the data matching term commonly imposed by autoencoders;
- The inner expectation enforces the decoders from each channel to accurately reconstruct their respective channels.

Finally, under the hypothesis that channels are conditionally independent from each other given $$\textbf{z}$$, the authors factorize the data likelihood as $$ p(\textbf{x} \vert \textbf{z}, \textbf{θ}_c) = \sum_{i=1}^{C} p(\textbf{x}_i \vert \textbf{z}, \textbf{θ}_c)$$ to reformulate the lower bound like below:

$$ \mathscr{L}(\textbf{θ}, \pmb{\phi}, \textbf{x}) = \mathbb{E}_c \left[ \mathbb{E}_{q(\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c )} \left[  \sum_{i=1}^{C} ln \: p(\textbf{x}_i \vert \textbf{z}, \textbf{θ}_c) \right] − D_{KL} (q (\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c, \pmb{\phi}_c) \parallel p (\textbf{z}) ) \right] $$

This **factorization of the data likelihood enforces that the posterior from each channel should be similar**, since they are used to reconstruct the input from other channels.

A figure from the [Github repository](https://gitlab.inria.fr/epione_ML/mcvae) explains schematically the general idea:
```

Reviewer: @OlivierBernard Given our discussion earlier today (and if you have the time!) I would appreciate if you could look at this new explanation of objective formulation and tell me if it matches your own interpretation :wink:

# Methods

Let $$ \textbf{x}  = \{\textbf{x}_c\}_{c=1}^{C} $$ be a single observation of a set of C channels, where each $$ \textbf{x}_c ∈ \mathbb{R}^{d_c} $$ is a $$ d_c $$-dimensional vector.

* $$ p(\textbf{z}) $$ : prior
* $$ p(\textbf{x}_c \vert \textbf{z}, \pmb{θ}_c) $$ : likelihood distribution
* $$ q(\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c, \pmb{\phi}_c) $$ : probability density function

They aim at minimiing :

$$ \underset{q∈Q}{argmin} \: \mathbb{E}_c[D_{KL} (q (\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c, \pmb{\phi}_c) \parallel p (\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_1, . . . , \textbf{x}_C , \pmb{θ}_1, . . . , \pmb{θ}_C ) )] $$

**Hypothesis :** Every channel is conditionally independent from all the others given z (it will allow to factorize the data likelihood, see supplementary material in the paper for more details). 

After developping the equation from above they have :

$$ \mathscr{L}(\textbf{θ}, \pmb{\phi}, \textbf{x}) = \mathbb{E}_c \left[ \mathbb{E}_{q(\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c )} \left[  \sum_{i=1}^{C} ln \: p(\textbf{x}_i \vert \textbf{z}, \textbf{θ}_c) \right] − D_{KL} (q (\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c, \pmb{\phi}_c) \parallel p (\textbf{z}) ) \right] $$

> A figure used in the [Github repository](https://gitlab.inria.fr/epione_ML/mcvae) to understand the global idea :

Reviewer: I find _general_ to be more commonly used in this context than _global_:
```suggestion
A figure used in the [Github repository](https://gitlab.inria.fr/epione_ML/mcvae) to understand the general idea:
```

![](/collections/images/MCSVI/Multi_Latent_Space.jpg)

# Results

> * They have created synthetic data (according to the equations shown below) and tested them with different parameters to prove the viability of their model.

Reviewer: Verb tense:
```suggestion
* They created synthetic data (according to the equations shown below) and tested them with different parameters to prove the viability of their model.
```

$$ \textbf{z} ∼ N (\textbf{0}; \textbf{I}_l) $$

$$ \textbf{ϵ} ∼ N (\textbf{0}; \textbf{I}_{d_c} ) $$

$$ \textbf{G}_c = diag (\textbf{R}_c \textbf{R}_c{^T} ){^{-1/2}}\textbf{R}_c $$

$$ \textbf{x}_c = \textbf{G}_c \textbf{z} + snr{^{−1/2}}.\textbf{ϵ} $$

* Here are the results with synthetic data :

![](/collections/images/MCSVI/results_part_1.jpg)

> It shows that their model perform well compared to single-channel model.

Reviewer: Conjugation + determinant:
```suggestion
It shows that their model performs well compared to a single-channel model.
```

> * They have tried it on real data as well :

Reviewer: Verb tense:
```suggestion
* They tried it on real data as well:
```

![](/collections/images/MCSVI/results_part_2.jpg)

> > Fig. 3: Pairwise representations of one latent dimension (out of 16) inferred from each of the four data channel. Although the optimization is not supervised to enforce clustering, subjects appear stratified by disease classes.

Reviewer: Plural:
```suggestion
> Fig. 3: Pairwise representations of one latent dimension (out of 16) inferred from each of the four data channels. Although the optimization is not supervised to enforce clustering, subjects appear stratified by disease classes.
```

* An example of generated data :

![](/collections/images/MCSVI/results_part_3.jpg)
Having a generative model allows them to validate the latent space they obtained.

> Moreover, according to typical results in the litterature for Alzheimer's Disease, the result they have is coherent.

Reviewer: Phrasing:
```suggestion
Moreover, the results they obtain are coherent with typical results from the litterature on Alzheimer's Disease.
```

# Conclusion

> * Multi-channel model that jointly analyzes multimodality data.

Reviewer: Should use an hyphen:
```suggestion
* Multi-channel model that jointly analyzes multi-modality data.
```

> * Model that can generate the data from the latent space

Reviewer: In this phrasing, _the_ should not be there.
```suggestion
* Model that can generate data from the latent space
```

* Linear method (that can be easily changed with deep learning methods)

> # References
> 
> The paper from 2019 with a deep learning and a more complex method :
> 
> [1] Antelmi, Luigi and Ayache, Nicholas and Robert, Philippe and Lorenzi, Marco. Sparse Multi-Channel Variational Autoencoder for the Joint Analysis of Heterogeneous Data (2019). PMLR. 
> 
> 

Reviewer: I think this reference is redundant since you already mention this paper (and give the link) at the beginning of the review.
```suggestion
```

Author: That's true, but if the link doesn't work anymore I think it's better to have the full reference somewhere don't you think ?
